TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES

 

42

1O

20

25

Willem die Madocke maecte, [192va,22]
daer hi dicken omme waecte,

hem vernoyde so haerde

dat die avonture van Reynaerde

in Dietsche onghemaket bleven

— die Arnout niet hevet vulscreven —
dat hi die vijte dede soucken

ende hise na den Walschen boucken
in Dietsche dus hevet begonnen.
God moete ons ziere hulpen jonnen!
Nu keert hem daertoe mijn zin

dat ic bidde in dit beghin

beede den dorpren enten doren,

ofte si commen daer si horen

dese rijme ende dese woort

(die hem onnutte sijn ghehoort),

dat sise laten onbescaven.

Te vele slachten si den raven,

die emmer es al even malsch.

Si maken sulke rijme valsch,

daer si niet meer of ne weten [192vb]
dan ic doe hoe dat si heeten

die nu in Babilonien leven.

Daden si wel, si soudens begheven.
Dat en segghic niet dor minen wille.
Mijns dichtens ware een ghestille,
ne hads mi eene niet ghebeden

die in groeter hovesscheden

1 AMiddle Dutch story about Madoc has not come down to us, but there are strong indi—
cations that a work with this title did at one time exist. Willem’s earlier tale probably told of a
dream that Madoc had, as seems to be suggested in Maerlant’s Rijmbijbel (cf. p. 16). Madoc is

sometimes considered to have been a story about a seafarer’s adventures.

6 It has been suggested that Van den v05 Reynaerde was written by two poets and that Wil—
lem completed Arnout’s unﬁnished work. However, serious objections may be raised to this
notion of joint authorship. Assuming that the name was not an invention, it seems probable,
also in view of the emphatic Walsch—Dietsch (French—Dutch) contrast in the lines before and

after the name, that Arnout was a French Renartpoet (cf. p. 15).
13 dorpren (‘peasants’) refers to non—courtly persons.

PROLOGUE

 

1O

20

25

Prologue

Willem who made Madocke,

which often kept him awake,

was so extremely annoyed

that the tales of Reynaert

— which Arnout has not ﬁnished —

remained unwritten in Dutch

that he had the life looked for

and, following the French books,

he began it in Dutch as follows.

May God favour us with his help!
NowI am ofa mind

to urge at this beginning

both peasants and fools

whenever they happen to hear

the rhyme and these words

(which are wasted on them),

that they leave them unchanged.

They too much resemble the raven

who always thinks he knows it all.

They claim that many verses are untrue

which they know no more ab out

than I know what the people are called

who now live in Babylon.

If they were sensible, they would give up.
I am not saying this for myself.

Iwould not have written this poem

if a certain lady had not asked me

who likes to conduct her affairs

23 Babilonien (‘Babylon’) is used here in ahyperbolic comparison to indicate a proverbially
distant, foreign place. It may well be the case that the oblique reference to biblical Babylon,
the scene of linguistic ‘babel’, is intentional. Genesis 11 describes how building the tower of
Babel led to the rise of multiple languages and the resulting confusion and incomprehension
among people.

26 Literally the Middle Dutch phrase reads: ‘my poetry writing would only be silence’.
26-31 Willem claims to have written his verse romance at the request of a courtly lady,
whom he does not, however, name. It is usually assumed that, rather than having a real,
existing person in mind, the poet parodied the medieval custom of dedicating writings to
the nobility, and especially to noble women.

43

TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES

 

44

3O

35

4o

45

50

55

gherne keert hare saken.

Soe bat mi dat ic soude maken
dese avontuere van Reynaerde.
Al begripic die grongaerde
ende die dorpren ende die doren,
ic wille dat dieghene horen

die gherne pleghen der eeren
ende haren zin daertoe keeren
dat si leven hoofschelike,

sijn si arem, sijn si rike,

diet verstaen met goeden sinne.
Nu hoert hoe ic hier beghinne!

Het was in eenen tsinxendaghe

dat beede bosch ende haghe

met groenen loveren waren bevaen.
Nobel die coninc hadde ghedaen

sijn hof crayeren overal,

dat hi waende, hadde hijs gheval,
houden ten wel groeten love.

Doe quamen tes sconinx hove

alle die diere, groet ende cleene,
sonder vos Reynaert alleene.

Hi hadde te hove so vele mesdaen
dat hire niet dorste gaen.

Die hem besculdich kent, ontsiet.
Also was Reynaerde ghesciet

ende hieromme scuwedi sconinx hof,
daer hi in hadde crancken lof.

Doe al dat hofversamet was,

was daer niemen, sonder die das,

hi ne hadde te claghene over Reynaerde,

42-48 The initially harmonious atmosphere is evoked by means of a so—called ‘Naturein—
gang’: it is spring and trees and hedgerows are covered in green leaves (see also 322—26). The

KING NOBLE HOLDS COURT

 

3O

35

4o

45

50

55

in a very courtly manner.

She asked me to make

this story about Reynaert.
Although I denounce the nit-pickers
and the peasants and the fools,
Iwish it to be heard by those

who like to act honourably

and put their minds

to living in a courtly way,

whether they be poor or rich,

and who will understand it properly.
Now hear how I begin!

King Nobel holds court

It was on a day at Whitsuntide

when trees and shrubbery alike

were dressed all over with green leaves.
Nobel the King had had

his court-day proclaimed everywhere,
which, he thought, — all being well —
would greatly increase his fame.

Then came to the king’s court

all the animals, large and small,

except for Reynaert the fox alone.

He had behaved so badly at court

that he did not dare go.

Whoever is knowingly guilty, is afraid.
This was the case with Reynaert

and that is why he avoided the king’s court
where his esteem was low.

When the entire court had gathered

there was nobody, except the badger,

who did not have some reason for complaining of

opening scene of Van den v05 Reynaerde stands in the tradition of many medieval Arthurian
romances, in which the king holds court on Ascension Day or at Whitsun.

45

TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES

 

46

60

65

7O

75

80

85

den fellen metten grijsen baerde.
Nu gaet hier up eene claghe.
Isingrijn ende sine maghe
ghinghen voer den coninc staen. [193ra]
Ysengrijn begonste saen

ende sprac: ‘Coninc heere,

dor hu edelheit ende dor hu eere
ende dor recht ende dor ghenade,
ontfaerme hu miere scade

die mi Reynaert heeft ghedaen,
daer ic af dicken hebbe ontfaen
groeten lachter ende verlies.

Voer al dandre ontfaerme hu dies
dat hi mijn wijfhevet verhoert

ende mine kindre so mesvoert

dat hise beseekede daer si laghen,
datter twee noint ne saghen

ende si worden staerblent.

Nochtan hoendi mi sent.

Het was sint so verre comen

datter eenen dach af was ghenomen
ende Reynaerd soude hebben ghedaen
sine onsculde. Ende also saen

alse die heleghe waren brocht,

was hi andersins bedocht

ende ontfoer ons in sine veste.
Heere, dit kennen noch die beste
die te hove zijn commen hier.

Mi hevet Reynaert, dat felle dier,

62-71 In the course of the court day Ysingrijn the wolf, supported by his relatives, brings
charges against Reynaert. Medieval feudal society initially lacked a strong, central source
of authority. The authorities usually prosecuted only after the injured party had made a for—
mal complaint. See also the ‘complaint’ made by Cortoys, and by Pancer/Cuwaert and Can—
tecleer later in the story.

72-77 In branch 11 ofthe Roman de Renart (Martin 1882—1887, 1027—1396) the foxﬁnds him—
self in the wolves’ lair by accident. After Haersint, the she—wolf, has agreed to have sexual
intercourse with Reynaert, the latter urinates on her cubs and leaves the lair. Once her hus—
band has returned, the she—wolf tries to convince him without much success that she has
been raped. A few days later the two wolves chase the fox. When the she—wolf gets stuck in the

KING NOBLE HOLDS COURT

 

60

65

7O

75

80

85

Reynaert, the scoundrel with the grey beard.
Now a charge is made against him.

Ysingrijn and his relatives

took up their positions before the king.

Ysingrijn began at once

and said: ‘My Lord King,

for the sake of your nobility and of your honour,

and for the sake of justice and of mercy,

take pity on the harm

inﬂicted upon me by Reynaert,

through whom I have often incurred

great humiliation and loss.

Take pity especially because

he has had his way with my wife

and has maltreated my children so badly

that, by pissing on them where they lay,

two of them lost their sight

and are now totally blind.

In addition he later disgraced me.

It had by then come to such a pass

that a day had been appointed

when Reynaert should swear

his innocence in court. But as soon

as the relics were brought,

he changed his mind

and escaped us in his stronghold.

My lord, this is well known among the highest

of those who have come here to court.

Reynaert, that vicious animal,

narrow entrance to the fox’s den, she is raped, in full view of the approaching wolf, by Ren—
art who has left his den by another exit. Ysingrijn’s complaint concerns the rape; for obvious
reasons he remains silent about his wife’s adultery (cf. pp. 32—33).

73 verhoert is ambiguous; apart from meaning ‘raped’, it refers to sexual fulﬁlment.

79-85 Reynaert’s escape when about to swear his innocence is seen in a differentlight when
the story onsingrijn’s devious plan, recounted in branch Va of the Roman de Renart, is taken
into account (Martin 1882—1887, 1091—1272). There the fox ﬂees because he discovers just in
time that the holy relics on which he was to swear were in fact the teeth of the dog Roonel,
who was shamming death. The wolf ’s biased version of events clearly demonstrates that he
is dissembling (cf. p. 33).

47

TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES

 

48

90

95

105

110

115

120

so vele te leede ghedaen,

ic weet wel al sonder waen:

al ware al tlaken paerkement

dat men maket nu te Ghent,

inne ghescreeft niet daeran.

Dies zwijghics nochtan,

neware mijns wives lachter

ne mach niet bliven achter,

no onversweghen no onghewroken.’
Doe Ysengrijn dit hadde ghesproken,
stont up een hondekijn, hiet Cortoys,
ende claghede den coninc in Francsoys
hoet so arem was wijleneere

dat alles goets en hadde meere

in eenen winter, in eene vorst,

dan alleene eene worst

ende hem Reynaert, die felle man, [193rb]
die selve worst stal ende nam.
Tybeert die cater die wart gram.
Aldus hi sine tale began

ende spranc midden in den rinc

ende seide: ‘Heere coninc,

dordat ghi Reynaerde zijt onhout,

so en es hier jonc no hout,

hi ne hebbe te wroughene jeghen hu.
Dat Cortoys claghet nu,

dats over menich jaer ghesciet.

Die worst was mine, al en claghic niet.
Ic hadse bi miere lust ghewonnen
daer ic bi nachte quam gheronnen
omme bejach in eene molen,

daer ic die worst in hadde ghestolen
eenen slapenden molenman.

Hadder Cortoys yewet an,

97 no onversweghen: onversweghen may be a scribal error for versweghen, but it could also be
argued that this is a slip of the tongue on Ysingrijn’s part (“nor not hushed up”).

107 Tybeert die cater: although the text speciﬁes that Tybeert is a male cat or tomcat, we
translate ‘cater’ as ‘cat’, in accordance with usual practice.

KING NOBLE HOLDS COURT

 

90

95

105

110

115

120

has done me so much harm,-

I am quite convinced:

if all the cloth now made in Ghent

were parchment, I should not have

enough to describe it all.

That is whyI prefer to be silent about it,

but my wife’s disgrace

must neither be overlooked,

nor not hushed up, nor remain without revenge.’
When Ysingrijn had spoken thus

a small dog stood up, called Cortoys,

and complained to the king in French

how a while ago it had been so poor

that it had had nothing left

one winter when there was a frost

except for one sausage

and that Reynaert, the scoundrel,

had stolen that very sausage from him.
Tybeert the cat was roused to fury.

This is how he began his speech

and he jumped into the middle of the circle

and he said: ‘My Lord King,

because you bear Reynaert ill will

there is no one here, young nor old,

or he has something to charge him with before you.

What Cortoys is complaining of now

happened many a year ago.

The sausage was mine, but I don’t complain.

Ihad got hold of it craftily

when one night, looking for something to bag,

Iwent into a mill

where I stole the sausage

from a sleeping miller.

If Cortoys proﬁted by it at all

107-25 Tybeert argues that Cortoys’ complaint is not admissible: the sausage belonged to
the cat, who in his turn had stolen it from a sleeping miller. As the miller was traditionally re—
nowned for sexual prowess in the Middle Ages, the sausage may have ambiguous implications.
117 lust is ambiguous, meaning both ‘clever trick’ as well as ‘lust’.

49

TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES

 

50

125

135

140

145

155

dan was bi niemene dan bi mi.

Hets recht dat omberecht zi

die claghe die Cortoys doet.’

Pancer de bever sprac: ‘Dinct hu goet,
Tybeert, dat men die claghe ombeere?
Reynaert es een recht mordeneere
ende een trekere ende een dief.

Hi ne heeft oec niemene so lief,

no den coninc, minen heere,

hi ne wilde dat hi lijf ende eere
verlore, mochtire an winnen

een vet morzeel van eere hinnen.
Wat sechdi van eere laghe?

En dedi ghistren in den daghe

eene die meeste overdaet

an Cuwaerde den hase, die hier staet,
die noyt eenich dier ghedede?

Want hi hem binnen sconinX vrede
ende binnen des coninX gheleede
ghelovede te leerne sinen crede

ende soudene maken capelaen.

Doe dedine sitten gaen

vaste tusschen sine beene.

Doe begonsten si overeene

spellen ende lesen beede [193va]
ende lude te zinghene crede.

Mi gheviel dat ic te dien tijden

ter selver stede soude lijden.

Doe hoerdic haerre beeder sanc
ende maecte daerwaert minen ganc
met eere arde snelre vaerde.

Doe vandic daer meester Reynaerde,
die ziere lessen hadde begheven

140-41 King Nobel has proclaimed peace, which meant that his subjects were not allowed
to carry weapons or to pursue old feuds. Reynaert’s attempt on Cuwaert’s life is, therefore,
also a breach of the king’s peace. This undermines Nobel’s authority, as Pancer the beaver
remarks at the end of his speech (165—69).

142-48 It has been suggested that the expressions maker: capelaen (‘make chaplain’) and

KING NOBLE HOLDS COURT

 

125

135

140

145

155

this was entirely my doing.

It would only be right to dismiss

the complaint that Cortoys makes.’
Pancer the beaver spoke: ‘Do you think it right,

Tybeert, that the complaint should be dismissed?

Reynaert really is a murderer

and a cheat and a thief.

Also, there is nobody he likes so much,

not even my lord the king,

that he would not wish him to lose

life and honour if that might get him

a succulent bite of a chicken.

And a trap, what do you say of that?

Did he not yesterday, in broad daylight,

perpetrate one of the worst crimes

ever committed by any animal

against Cuwaert the hare, standing here?

For at a time when the king’s peace

and safe conduct have been proclaimed,

he promised to teach him the creed

and to make him chaplain.

Then he made him sit

tightly between his legs.

Together they began

to practice spelling and reading

and to sing the creed loudly.

It so happened that at this moment

Ipassed that place.

Then I heard them singing together

and went in that direction,

at a great speed.

Then I found master Reynaert there

who had ﬁnished

zingen crede (‘sing the creed’) should be read as scabrous allusions to masturbation and
sexual intercourse respectively. If this is correct, Reynaert and Cuwaert committed the sin
that should not be named in the Middle Ages (the crimen nefandum): homosexual love. See
in this context also 144—45. This interpretation is supported by a marginal decoration, depic—
ting a very frightened hare with a bloodied bottom, holding a book (cf. Meuwese 2006).

51

TEXT, TRANSLATION AND NOTES

 

52

170

175

die hi tevoren up hadde gheheven,
ende diende van sinen houden spelen
ende hadde Coewaerde bi der kelen
ende soude hem thoeft afhebben ghenomen
waer ic hem niet te hulpen comen

bi avontueren in dien stonden.

Siet hier noch die verssche wonden
ende die teekine, heere coninc,

die Coewaert van hem ontﬁnc.

Laetti dit bliven onghewroken,

dat hu verde dus es tebroken,

ghi ne wreket als huwe mannen wijsen,
men saelt huwen kindren mesprijsen
hiernaer over wel menich jaer.’

‘Bi Gode, Pancer, ghi secht waer,’
sprac Ysengrijn daer hi stoet.

‘Heere, waer Reynaerd doot, het waer ons goet,
also behoude mi God mijn leven.
Neware wert hem dit vergheven,

hi sal noch hoenen binnen eere maent
sulken dies niet ne bewaent.’

Doe spranc up Grinbert die das,

die Reynaerts broedersone was,

met eere verbolghenlike tale:

‘Heere Ysengrijn, men weet dat wale
ende hets een hout bijspel:

viants mont seit selden wel.

Verstaet, neemt miere talen goem:

ic wilde, hi hinghe an eenen boem

bi ziere kelen als een dief

die andren heeft ghedaen meest grief.

162-64 The person bringing the charge can strengthen his case by supplying evidence.
That is why Pancer points to his relative Cuwaert’s fresh wounds. A well—known example
from Germanic legal practice is the complaint with the dead man: the victim’s body is
brought to the court of law by his relatives and is shown when the charge is made. This is
also the reason why Cantecleer will bring his daughter Coppe’s dead body to the court on
a bier (283—90).

177-282 In his plea for the defence Grimbeert the badger first proposes a reconciliation
between the fox and Ysingrijn, Reynaert’s most powerful enemy. He argues that this is the

